doc: add documentation section about Hubble internals (#11139)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/hubble.rst

****************
Hubble internals
****************

> .. note:: This documentation section is targeted at developers who are willing

Reviewer: nit: maybe change it to: `who are interested in contributing to Hubble`

Author: Better indeed. Updated.

          interested in contributing to Hubble. For this purpose, it describes
          Hubble internals.

.. note:: This documentation covers the Hubble server (sometimes referred as
          "Hubble embedded") and Hubble-relay components but does not cover the
          Hubble UI and CLI.

Hubble builds on top of Cilium and eBPF to enable deep visibility into the
communication and behavior of services as well as the networking infrastructure
in a completely transparent manner.

> One of the design goals of Hubble is to achieve all of this at large scale.

Reviewer 2: `all of this` at the start of a new paragraph carries little context

Author: Shall I merge this paragraph with the one above? Or simply `s/all of//` ?

Reviewer: either way, maybe slightly more natural to combine them into a single paragraph.

Author: I've combined it into a single paragraph.

Although the initial release of Hubble was a standalone component, as of Cilium
1.8, Hubble server is embedded into the Cilium agent. This decision has been
taken due to performance concerns and drift with the Hubble standalone approach
as Hubble had to replicate a lot of the Cilium state in its process by calling
Cilium API. This not only contributed to performance overhead but more

> importantly was the source of a lot of code duplication and maintenance burden.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph is written from the perspective of educating people who already know how hubble works and describes how hubble has changed since before Cilium v1.8. Over time this is a shrinking set of people and will require updating to remove these old references.

I feel like it would be clearer to just take the approach of "Here are the goals of the architecture and why we have chosen to design it this way".

Author: That's a very good point. I have rewritten this section according to your feedback. PTAL.

.. note:: This guide does not cover Hubble in standalone mode, which is

>           deprecated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
          deprecated with the release of Cilium v1.8.
```

Hubble Architecture
===================

Hubble exposes gRPC services from the Cilium process that allows clients to
receive flows and other type of data.

Hubble server
-------------

The Hubble server component implements two gRPC services. The **Peer service**,

> which is only served on a local Unix domain socket, and the **Observer service**

Reviewer 3: nit: You introduce these in the order (1) peer then (2) observer but the sections are the reverse order. It's cleaner to have them follow the same order (ideally of importance, or knowledge you need to build up in order to proceed to the next section).

which may optionally be exposed via a TCP socket in addition to a local Unix
domain socket.

The Observer service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Observer service is the principal service. It makes two methods available:
``GetFlows`` and ``ServerStatus``.  While the ``ServerStatus`` method is pretty
straightforward (it provides metrics related to the running server), the
``GetFlows`` one is far more sophisticated and the more important one.

Using ``GetFlows``, callers can get a stream of payloads. Request parameters
allow callers to specify filters in the form of blacklists and whitelists to

> allow for fine grain filtering of data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
allow for fine-grained filtering of data.
```

In order to answer ``GetFlows`` requests, Hubble stores monitoring events from
Cilium's event monitor into a ring buffer structure.  Monitoring events are
obtained by registering a new listener to Cilium's monitor.  The ring buffer is
capable of storing a configurable amount of events in memory. Events are
continuously consumed, overriding older ones once the ring buffer is full.

.. image:: ./images/hubble_getflows.png

For efficiency, the internal buffer length is a bit mask of ones + 1. The most
significant bit of this bit mask is the same position of the most significant
bit position of 'n'. In other terms, the internal buffer size is always a power
of 2. As the ring buffer is a hot code path, it has been designed to not employ
any locking mechanisms and uses atomic operations instead. While this approach
has performance benefits, it also has the downsides of being a complex
component and that reading the very last event written to the buffer is not

> possible as it cannot be guaranteed that it is not still in the process of
> being written.

Reviewer 3: Double-negative is a bit difficult to parse. Suggestion:

```suggestion
possible as it cannot be guaranteed that it has been fully written.
```

> Due to its complex nature, the ring buffer is typically accessed via a ringer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Due to its complex nature, the ring buffer is typically accessed via a ring
```

****************
Hubble internals
****************

.. note:: This documentation section is targeted at developers who are willing
          to contribute to Hubble. For this purpose, it describes Hubble
          internals.

.. note:: This documentation covers the Hubble server (sometimes referred as
          "Hubble embedded") and Hubble-relay components but does not cover the
          Hubble UI and CLI.

Hubble builds on top of Cilium and eBPF to enable deep visibility into the
communication and behavior of services as well as the networking infrastructure
in a completely transparent manner.

One of the design goals of Hubble is to achieve all of this at large scale.

> Although the initial release of Hubble was a standalone product, as of Cilium

Reviewer 4: Replace product

Author: I replaced product by component (I'm open to suggestions).

1.8, Hubble server is embedded into the Cilium agent. This decision has been

> taken due to performance concerns, data races and drift with the Hubble

Reviewer 4: Remove data races. We could definitely run data race free with either model

standalone approach as Hubble had to replicate a lot of the Cilium state in its
process by calling Cilium API. This not only contributed to performance

> overhead but more importantly caused a lot of code duplication and hard to

Reviewer 4: s/hard to debug desynchronizatoin bugs/maintenance burden/.

****************
Hubble internals
****************

.. note:: This documentation section is targeted at developers who are
          interested in contributing to Hubble. For this purpose, it describes
          Hubble internals.

.. note:: This documentation covers the Hubble server (sometimes referred as
          "Hubble embedded") and Hubble-relay components but does not cover the
          Hubble UI and CLI.

Hubble builds on top of Cilium and eBPF to enable deep visibility into the
communication and behavior of services as well as the networking infrastructure
in a completely transparent manner. One of the design goals of Hubble is to
achieve all of this at large scale.

Hubble's server component is embedded into the Cilium agent in order to achieve
high performance with low-overhead. The gRPC services offered by Hubble server
may be consumed locally via a Unix domain socket or, more typically, through
Hubble-relay. Hubble-relay is a standalone component which is aware of all
running Hubble instances and offers full cluster visibility by connecting to
their respective gRPC APIs. This capability is usually referred to as

> multi-node. Hubble-relay's main goal is to offer a rich API than can be safely
> be exposed and consumed by the Hubble UI and CLI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
multi-node. Hubble-relay's main goal is to offer a rich API that can be safely
exposed and consumed by the Hubble UI and CLI.
```

Author: Oops indeed. Fixed.

****************
Hubble internals
****************

.. note:: This documentation section is targeted at developers who are
          interested in contributing to Hubble. For this purpose, it describes
          Hubble internals.

.. note:: This documentation covers the Hubble server (sometimes referred as
          "Hubble embedded") and Hubble-relay components but does not cover the
          Hubble UI and CLI.

Hubble builds on top of Cilium and eBPF to enable deep visibility into the
communication and behavior of services as well as the networking infrastructure
in a completely transparent manner. One of the design goals of Hubble is to
achieve all of this at large scale. Although the initial release of Hubble was
a standalone component, as of Cilium 1.8, Hubble server is embedded into the
Cilium agent. This decision has been taken due to performance concerns and
drift with the Hubble standalone approach as Hubble had to replicate a lot of
the Cilium state in its process by calling Cilium API. This not only
contributed to performance overhead but more importantly was the source of a

> lot of code duplication and maintenance burden.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph is written from the perspective of someone who knows what Hubble did in the past and compares with the older version. I don't think this makes sense.

IMO we should state the goals we are trying to achieve and how the architecture achieves those goals. References to older standalone architecture will date quickly and just add unnecessary detail to new contributors.

Reviewer 3: In particular from `Although the initial release of Hubble was a standalone component, as of Cilium 1.8` onwards.

Cilium's event monitor into a ring buffer structure.  Monitoring events are
obtained by registering a new listener to Cilium's monitor.  The ring buffer is
capable of storing a configurable amount of events in memory. Events are
continuously consumed, overriding older ones once the ring buffer is full.

.. image:: ./images/hubble_getflows.png

For efficiency, the internal buffer length is a bit mask of ones + 1. The most
significant bit of this bit mask is the same position of the most significant
bit position of 'n'. In other terms, the internal buffer size is always a power
of 2. As the ring buffer is a hot code path, it has been designed to not employ
any locking mechanisms and uses atomic operations instead. While this approach
has performance benefits, it also has the downsides of being a complex
component and that reading the very last event written to the buffer is not
possible as it cannot be guaranteed that it is not still in the process of
being written.

Due to its complex nature, the ring buffer is typically accessed via a ringer
reader that abstracts the complexity of this data structure for reading. The

> ring reader allows reading one event at the time with 'previous' and 'next'

Reviewer 3: One thought, not necessary but if the code is stable enough..

In KVstore docs page (https://docs.cilium.io/en/v1.7/kvstore/) we list items and reference the relevant code. If we have stable APIs then you could potentially reference them here.

Not sure if it helps or makes sense for this specific description but it's a possibility.

Author: I think this API is pretty stable, yes. However, there are not up to date doc that we can link to (and it looks hitting 'refresh' on godoc.org doesn't update it). Nevertheless, I don't think that it is so important that it needs to be linked.

> methods but also implements a follow-mode where events are continuously read as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
methods but also implements a follow mode where events are continuously read as
```

they are written to the ring buffer.

The Peer service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Peer service lists Hubble peers and notifies of changes. This allows the

Reviewer 3: notifies of changes to the list of peers?

Author: I have rewritten this paragraph to make this more clear. PTAL.
